.TH AAD-TOOL "1" "September 2024" "Himmelblau 0.5.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
aad-tool \- Azure Entra ID (AAD) management utility for Himmelblau
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B aad-tool
\fI<COMMAND>\fR [OPTIONS]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The `aad-tool` utility is part of the Himmelblau project, designed to manage and interact with Azure Entra ID through various commands. It allows you to test authentication, manage caches, and check the status of services related to the `himmelblaud` resolver.

.SS Commands:
.TP
.B auth-test
Test user authentication via the `himmelblaud` resolver using the PAM channel. This does not validate your PAM configuration but ensures that `himmelblaud` is correctly processing and verifying user authentications.

.TP
.B cache-clear
Clear all entries in the `himmelblaud` resolver cache. This operation removes cached user and group data. Use `cache-invalidate` for safer cache management without erasing data.

.TP
.B cache-invalidate
Invalidate the `himmelblaud` resolver cache without erasing entries. This forces the `himmelblaud` daemon to refresh all cached user and group data. If offline, the cache remains available and will refresh automatically when back online.

.TP
.B idmap
Manage the static idmapping cache used to map Entra ID accounts to static UID/GID values. This is useful for migrations from on-prem AD to Entra ID, where existing UID/GID mappings need to be preserved.

.B idmap user-add
Add a static user mapping to the idmap cache. This maps an Entra ID user (by UPN) to a fixed UID and GID. This ensures consistent UNIX identity across logins.

.nf
Usage: aad-tool idmap user-add --name <ACCOUNT_ID> --uid <UID> --gid <GID> [--debug]
.fi

.B idmap group-add
Add a static group mapping to the idmap cache. This maps an Entra ID group (by name) to a fixed GID. This can be used to maintain group identity and membership compatibility after moving to Entra ID.

.nf
Usage: aad-tool idmap group-add --name <ACCOUNT_ID> --gid <GID> [--debug]
.fi

.TP
.B status
Check if the `himmelblaud` daemon is online and properly connected to the Himmelblau service.

.TP
.B version
Display the version of the `aad-tool`.

.TP
.B help
Show help information for the specified subcommand(s).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB-h\fR, \fB--help\fR
Display help information.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B aad-tool auth-test
Test user authentication through the `himmelblaud` PAM resolver.

.TP
.B aad-tool cache-clear
Clear all user and group data from the resolver cache.

.TP
.B aad-tool status
Check the connection status of the `himmelblaud` daemon.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.B himmelblau
Documentation is available through the Texinfo manual. Use the following command to access the full manual:

.BR info himmelblau
